[THEME MUSIC]
>>GREGG BRADEN: Hello.
My name's Gregg
Braden, and I'd like
to welcome you to this all
new episode of "The Divine
Matrix," Bridging Time,
Space, Miracles, and Belief.
In the last episode,
we explored what
it means to live in
a reflected reality,
where our truest thoughts,
feelings, and emotions,
and our beliefs are reflected
in the outer canvas of the world
around us, the Divine Matrix.
I also identified an
even deeper mystery
that allows us to give
and receive messages
from the matrix--
the mystery of time itself.
Well, in this
episode, I'll share
the discovery that
has forced scientists
to reconsider the way
they think of time,
as well as our
relationship to it.
In the mid-1990s, I was
traveling with my group
in Egypt when we experienced
something that cannot be
explained by
conventional physics.
At least, the way we
know physics today.
Yet, the experience happened.
And it happened to the
50-plus people in our group.
It happened to the
Egyptian guides
that were accompanying us.
And it even happened to the
military convoy, both the one
in front and behind us that was
escorting us across the Sinai
Desert into Cairo.
I had just been with
this group for two weeks.
For two weeks, we had journeyed
through this mystical land
together.
We traveled down the Nile River,
experiencing all the temples
along the Nile, into
Luxor, into the West Bank
of the Nile, Tut's Tomb.
We'd had an amazing experience.
And I'm sharing this
with you because it's
through these kinds
of experiences
that we bond together
with one another.
We find this with our
friends, with our families.
We bond in heart and in mind.
And that's going to be
important to the experience
that I'm going to
describe in just a moment.
Well, from the foundation
of this bonding
and this experience
that we'd had together,
we'd travel back to Cairo.
And we had driven
the eight-plus hours
that it takes to go
across the Sinai,
underneath the Suez Canal,
up to the top of the mountain
on the Sinai Peninsula
that is known
as Mount Sinai, Moses Mountain.
And we had spent time
together on Moses Mountain
and the magnificent monastery,
the Saint Catherine's Monastery
that's right at the base.
We had hiked to the top
of the mountain at sunset.
And all of these amazing,
beautiful, powerful, magical,
mystical experiences
brought this group together
in a really powerful way.
From these experiences,
we were ready now
to make the journey
back across that desert,
that eight-hour
drive, and we were
going to go directly to
what many people considered
the reason that they
had come to Egypt.
We were going to go directly
to the Great Pyramid
on the plateau of Giza.
And we had been
given permission--
and again, this is in the 1990s.
We'd been given permission
for our entire group
to go inside the pyramid and
have the doors close behind us
and have all of the
chambers available to us
for almost six hours.
And the anticipation
was palpable.
Everyone was so excited to be
inside of the Great Pyramid.
So while we were
making the drive back--
we'd left Saint
Catherine's Monastery.
We were driving along the road.
The Red Sea was to one side.
We went through the
military checkpoints
about every 20 minutes
at that time, where
they would check passports.
They would check just to make
sure that everything was OK.
And I'm sharing this part of
the experience, because all
of these things added
time to the journey,
and time that should have
been a factor in when
we arrived in Cairo.
All of a sudden,
the bus stopped.
And I was in conversation
with a friend next to me,
and I didn't pay much
attention, because I assumed
it was just another checkpoint.
But the bus stopped, and this
time, something different
happened.
I heard voices outside, and
I looked out the window.
And from the troop
carrier that was in front
of us, the military convoy--
it was a large pickup
with a canvas cover--
I saw the military men
coming out from the truck.
They were milling
around the road,
and everybody was
looking at their watch.
And I looked in the mirrors,
the rearview mirrors of the bus,
and I could see that the
troop carrier behind us
was doing the same thing.
These soldiers were just
looking totally mystified.
My driver left the bus, and
he was talking with my guide.
And that was when I
knew something was up.
So I got off the
bus, and I went down
and I asked my guy--
his name was Mohammed.
Mohammed, I said,
what's going on?
I said, why have we stopped?
Why is everybody milling around?
Why does everybody
look so confused?
And he said, look where
we are, my brother.
And I said, we are in front of
Sadat's tomb, President Sadat's
tomb.
It is a very well-known marker,
but it's in the city of Cairo.
And I said, here we
are at Sadat's tomb.
We made good time.
And he says, no.
He said, you don't understand.
He said, we can't be here.
We cannot be here yet.
He said, it takes at
least seven to eight hours
to make this journey, as we
made last week when we came out.
He said, it's only
been four hours.
It's only been four hours
since we left Saint Catherine's
Monastery.
That's the point of this story.
It's a beautiful example of
our relationship to time.
What had happened in that
experience in Egypt is this.
And maybe you've had this
kind of experience yourself.
What happened was it was
the anticipation, the mental
and the emotional
anticipation of everyone
in this group, the 50-plus
people in this group,
as a combined consciousness
in their hearts
and in their minds.
They were so
excited to be inside
of the Great Pyramid in
their minds and their hearts,
they were already there.
Now, there's a powerful
difference here.
I'm going to make a distinction.
There's a powerful
difference between feeling
that you're already there
and feeling that this trip is
taking forever.
This trip is dragging on.
When are we finally
going to get there?
The emotional anticipation
and the feeling
that we were already
in this pyramid--
that we're feeling what it
would be like to be inside
of this mystical monument that
most of us have seen since we
were children.
We've seen it in
the pages of books.
They were feeling what
this would feel like.
What we now know,
through the science
and what I'm going to share
with you through this episode,
is how this emotional
component of our experience
ties into the mystery
of time on a level
where time becomes
insignificant.
So what I mean by
that is when we
are experiencing linear time--
and that's the
thinking that says,
man, this is taking
forever to get from point A
to point B. I can't
wait until we're there.
That's very different
than the emotional,
the heart-based experience
of actually feeling
that we are at the place
that we have arrived.
We are at the place
that ends our journey.
Because that emotion,
science is now telling us,
is occurring on a quantum level,
and it's happening at a place
where new discoveries have told
us that time is insignificant,
that time is
essentially meaningless.
Time either seems to speed up
and pass too quickly when we're
enjoying something
that we really love
or if we're spending time
with someone that we really
enjoy spending time with.
Or maybe just the opposite
maybe has happened to you.
Maybe time seemed to slow down
and drag through an experience
that you really didn't enjoy.
Well, in either
situation, your experience
was subjective, just like
the people on the bus.
And while the time shift
definitely happened for you
in your experience, it
may not have happened
for the people around you.
And that's the point of
what I'm saying here.
Our experience of time, what
happened to us on the bus,
it involved not only
us, but the field
influenced even the military
people in separate vehicles
that were in front
and behind our bus.
Our experience of time
appears to be directly linked
to our personal as well as
our collective experience.
And that is precisely what
happened with the group
in Egypt.
So time.
This is what this
episode is all about.
Every day, we talk about time.
We use it.
We try to save time.
We even have what we call
daylight savings time.
It fills our lives.
But we've never been
able to truly define
the mystery of time.
For the first time,
science is making inroads
to solving this mysterious
quality of our lives.
Science has historically
held two very different views
of what time is and what
it means in our lives.
Professor John Wheeler,
Princeton University,
the physicist and
colleague of Einstein
that I mentioned earlier
in this program--
he offered an obvious, yet
very functional view of time
when he said-- and
this is a quote.
He defined time by
saying, "Time is
nature's way of
keeping everything
from happening all at once."
End of quote.
When we think about it,
he's precisely correct.
Wheeler's view of time echoes
the traditional qualities
of time held by what we
call classical physics.
Those qualities tell us that
time, number one, is absolute,
that it is an absolute quality
that cannot be changed.
And number two, that
time is universal.
That no matter
where we are, time
exists, at the very large
scales of the universe,
at the very small
at the farthest
reaches of the cosmos.
All right.
So these are the
traditional views.
Now, not surprisingly, Wheeler's
friend and his colleague,
his peer, Albert Einstein--
again, they studied at
the same university.
They were using
the same equations.
They had the same mathematics.
They had very, very
different viewpoints,
as we saw earlier
in another episode.
Einstein offered a very
different view of time,
and it was based upon
his theory of relativity
that he was developing.
Einstein said, number
one-- no surprise--
that time is
relative, that it is
dependent upon the observer and
the experience of the observer.
And number two, Einstein
said that time is malleable.
So in Einstein's
very famous theories,
he considered time in a
way that science had never
thought of time in the past.
What Einstein said is that
when we think of time--
and this is very important--
he said we cannot separate time
from the space that the events
of time are traveling through.
I'm going to invite you
to think about that.
We cannot separate the time
from the things that are
experiencing the time.
And it was this thinking
that led Einstein
to coin the very famous
term space-time, mirroring
this belief that time and
space are forever related.
They are married as a higher
dimension, a fourth dimension
of our experience.
Well, Einstein's view
of relative time--
it's reflected in a
really beautiful poem
by Henry van Dyke, the poet.
And the poem-- let me
just share this with you,
because it's so true.
What van Dyke said was that
"time is too slow for those who
wait, time is too
swift for those
who fear, too long for those who
grieve, but for those who love,
time is an eternity."
You may recognize those
words as the lyrics
of a very famous
song in the 1980s
by a group called
"It's a Beautiful Day."
So the scientific study
of time has led scientists
to ask questions about just
what is the nature of time.
Is it a force?
Is time a force, something
that can be measured,
like the force of gravity?
Is time merely a perception?
Is it ours, something that
we manage and control?
If we weren't even
here, would time exist?
Like, if you weren't in a
forest to hear the tree fall,
would it make a sound?
1967.
John Wheeler and
another physicist--
his name was DeWitt--
they developed an
equation that is now
a very famous equation
in their attempt
to solve one of the problems
that has plagued scientists
from the beginning of the
time that physics was created.
It is the problem of
trying to unify the two
different schools of physics,
classical physics and quantum
physics.
To this day,
scientists are still
searching for this
elusive unified field
theory, where the laws of
the very small in the quantum
world and what we see happening
in the very large world
of galaxies and
the universe, where
those laws can be merged into
a single, beautiful, elegant
story.
It hasn't happened yet.
In 1967, Wheeler and
DeWitt created an equation
where they did, in fact,
solve this mysterious problem.
And in solving the
mystery of what
it takes to unify these two
different kinds of physics,
they made a
discovery that opened
a door to a
mind-boggling possibility
when it comes to time.
So the Wheeler-DeWitt equation,
as it's called-- it's elegant.
It's simple.
It works really, really
well, beautifully.
However, there is one small
glitch, one small catch
to the success of the equation.
It only works when time is
left out of the calculations.
If they throw the quality of
time out of the calculations,
all of the numbers,
all the equations,
all the factors fall
into place perfectly.
Everything else in
the equation reflects
what scientists accept to
be true about the world
as we know it.
It's just that time itself
does not seem to fit.
So this is a quandary.
And this is a quandary that has
led to the obvious question,
is time even real?
Is it as universal as we think?
Does it really exist everywhere?
At the Max Planck Institute
of Quantum Optics--
this is a leading
research institution
studying things
that are happening
on the very, very small
level of the quantum world--
scientists are exploring
quantum time, the tiniest units
of time imaginable,
in an attempt
to answer these questions.
I want to share with
you what they found,
because what they
found is forcing
the scientific community
to rethink everything
that they believed to be
true about time in the past.
The scientists at the
Institute discovered a place
where time appears
to be meaningless
and is essentially non-existent.
They found a place
where, essentially, time
doesn't exist.
This mysterious realm
is known as Planck time,
and it is described
as a scale of events
that's very, very small.
It measures-- I'll just
give you the measurement--
10 to the minus 43 seconds.
So if something is
happening and the time
between the beginning
of that something
and the end of that something
falls within this realm of 10
to the minus 43 seconds--
just to give you
an idea of what this
is, that is a minus 10
followed by 43 zeros.
If something is happening on
that scale, this quantum scale,
for all intents and all
purposes, time does not exist.
Now, this is an
important discovery,
because it suggests
that time may not
be what we think it is at all.
It may not be as universal as
we have thought in the past.
And there are a number
of physicists now
that are on board
with this thinking.
The theoretical Italian
physicist Carlo Rovelli--
he agrees.
And I want to share
with you a quote.
He said, "It may
be that the best
way to think about
quantum reality
is to give up the
notion of time."
He said, "the fundamental
description of the universe
must be timeless."
And that's the end of the quote.
Wow, that is a very
powerful statement.
That, again, is like an
earthquake reverberating
through the world
of physics, who
has struggled with this curious
factor of time from the time
that physics began.
Well I want to share,
there's another reason
that the discovery of
this place where time
doesn't exist as we know it--
there's another reason
this is important.
Because the quantum realm,
where time appears to be
meaningless-- you're
going to love this--
it is precisely the place
where human emotion begins.
It's the place where
human emotion creates
the effects that appear
to be spontaneous,
like instantaneous healings,
for example, that appear
to be miracles that
we can't explain
or the intuition
between the mother
and her son in a battlefield
halfway around the world
that we talked about
in a previous episode.
Those things are happening
not in the everyday world.
They're happening in
the quantum world.
And this is the place
where the ideas of time
appear to break down.
Well, in season 2
of "Missing Links,"
we explored a growing body
of scientific evidence
that suggests that
we are living in what
is called a simulation
that is happening inside
of a virtual reality.
If you haven't seen
that season, I'm
going invite you
to check it out,
because it ties in
beautifully to everything
we're saying right
now about time.
And I'm going to take it one
step further with something
that I did not share,
because the information
wasn't available in season 2.
This idea that time is
unfolding within this simulation
and the evidence that
supports it has now
opened the door to a
new way of thinking
about the mysteries of
the universe itself.
What is prayer?
What is life?
What is death?
Who is God?
All of those take
on a new meaning
when we think about a
simulation in a virtual reality.
And the idea of time takes
on a whole new meaning.
From the perspective
of simulation theory,
the mystery of time
actually becomes easier
to explain in the
traditional sense.
And in doing so, it also
becomes even more mysterious.
And here here's what I mean.
In simulation theory,
time is thought
of as a program, a program that
is running under the operating
system that we would
call the Divine Matrix.
I'm going to invite you to think
about that just for a moment.
Think about what you know
about computers right now.
Every computer has
an operating system.
The Apple computers have
the Apple operating system.
The IBM computers have theirs.
The operating system
is the big system
that allows all of
your other programs
to run under those systems.
So all the applications
we're running,
all of your Facebook, and
YouTube, and PowerPoint,
and Word, and all of the things
that we run-- they're all
running within this
operating system, depending
what kind of computer we have.
So we can think of the
divine matrix, this quantum
field of energy,
this Higgs field
that we talked about
earlier in this series--
that's the operating system.
Now scientists are
considering time
as a program, a program
that has been designed,
a piece of software.
Very high level, very
sophisticated software.
Time is a program running
underneath that operating
system, and you and I are
living within that program.
It's this program,
they say, that is
driving our experience forward.
We talk about the
forward arrow of time.
Time always seems to be
moving in one direction.
However, the
mystery-- and Einstein
talked about this-- is there's
nothing that prevents time
from moving in reverse.
I'm going to talk about
that in just a minute.
So I'm just going to
acknowledge right now,
I know these are huge concepts,
and I'm covering them quickly
in a relatively
short period of time.
But I wanted to
introduce these concepts
so that you have the opportunity
to know that this idea of time
and what we think
about as time--
it's changing.
It's not set in stone.
And the new discoveries,
such as the possibility
of us living in a
simulated reality,
they have helped to unstuck us.
All right?
They are taking us out of
the rut of the old ways
of thinking and introducing new
ways and new possibilities that
are suddenly opening myriad
doors to new understandings.
And this, for me, is one of
the most exciting-- thinking
of time as a program.
So I wanted to introduce
these ideas and these concepts
here in this episode so that
we can tie into it later
in this series.
So interestingly,
the characteristics
of time and the way it flows,
they all support this idea.
Think about this.
Time has a beginning.
Time has an end.
Time unfolds as events that
follow repeating patterns.
These are all the
kinds of things
you would expect to see
happening in a program.
The patterns of time
repeat on different scales,
just as they would in a program.
They reoccur as cycles, just
as they would in a program.
We can move forward and we
can move backward in the time
program by shifting our focus.
Meditative techniques help
us to do precisely that.
So I'm going to share this new
model, a new way of thinking
about time, that may help to
give you a visual image of how
it's possible,
why it's possible,
for you to see the future
before it actually happens.
And I believe that will
illustrate this idea of time
as a program.
So a recent series
of experiments
from seven independent
laboratories
indicate that the
human body apparently
can detect time and
events that have happened
before they occur,
randomly delivered stimulus
from the future.
Now, the phenomenon, we
would call this prescient,
as in feeling in the future.
In the paper that
was released, they've
got a new term for this.
It is called PAA.
And PAA stands for Predictive
Anticipatory Activity.
So let me share with
you how it works.
I'm going to invite you to
visualize in your mind--
or maybe you can see
this on the screen--
if you can think
of time as a flow,
just like the flow of a river.
So think of time like
the flow of a river.
And the river is moving
in one direction.
So in this case, I'm going to
say it's moving from the left
to the right.
All right.
Because we know
that time follows
what we call the arrow of time.
All right.
As that river is
flowing, if we were
to put a post in the
center of the river,
that post would represent a
significant emotional event
that will happen in our
lives in the future.
It could be a marriage.
It could be a divorce.
It could be a loss
of a loved one.
It could be an ecstatic,
joyous experience.
The key here is that it is
emotionally significant for us.
So if you think of the post
in the river representing
an emotionally
significant experience.
Now, you know that if
the river is flowing,
and when the flow
hits that post,
it will create ripples
around the post.
And here's where this
gets really interesting.
Some of those
ripples actually will
occur upstream before the
post is reached by the water.
OK.
So you have the post.
The water is flowing,
creating the ripples,
but the ripples don't
stop at the post.
Some of those ripples
actually precede the posts.
Scientists believe this is the
way the program of time works.
Emotionally significant
events in our lives
are like the posts
in that river.
They create ripples that
move backward in space-time
and precede the event before
it ever even happened,
sometimes by moments, sometimes
by days, sometimes by weeks.
Now, where this gets
especially interesting
is, as you've seen in
previous episodes in "Missing
Links," the human body.
In 1991, science discovered
40,000 specialized cells
in the human heart that are
called sensory neurites.
The term says it all.
They're essentially
brain-like cells,
but they're not in the brain.
They're in the heart.
These sensory neurites
have the sensitivity
to pick up information
from the field.
And it is now
believed that it is
in our heart, those sensory
neurites that are picking up
the ripples of the events--
significant events in your life
and my life globally, locally.
And if we have the
sensitivity to acknowledge
and the willingness
to acknowledge
what it is our heart
is saying to us,
it's not surprising that we
can often pick up these ripples
and have a feeling
about the events
before the events ever happened.
We saw this on a mass scale
for September 11, 2001.
There are countless
reports of people
that changed their
plans, didn't go to work,
changed airplane flights
just because they
had a feeling that it
wasn't the best thing to do.
They had a sense that
something was up,
something was going to happen.
And I'll talk about
this in a later episode.
So I wanted to
share this with you.
And with these ideas in
mind, our exploration of time
is now taking on a whole new
meaning, both in the world
as well as in our personal
lives and our relationships.
Whether the cycles
are playing out
on the smaller scale
at a personal level
or the large scale
on a global level,
our lives are unfolding within
the container of the Divine
Matrix.
In the next episode, we'll
explore the 3,000-year-old map
of time that holds the key
to where the cycles lead
and the secret to our personal
as well as our global destiny.
I want to thank you for
joining me for today's program.
And be sure to tune
in for our next
all new episode of "The Divine
Matrix," Bridging Time, Space,
Miracles, and Belief.
[THEME MUSIC]